High in this video we're going to look at extended unpacking so we can look at the first operator of
these star operators.
And much of the section applies to Python greater than or equal to 3.5.
A lot of these functions of this functionality that we're going to talk about was introduced in Python
3.5.
So you should be running at least Python 3.5.
For this video you should probably be running Python 3.6 which is current as of the recording.
So we don't always want to unpack every single item that's in and iterable may for example want to unpack
the first value and then unpack the remaining values into another variable.
Right.
We want to just stuff everything else into another single variable.
So let's take a look at an example of what I mean by this.
So let's say we take this list one two three four five six.
Now we can do this by using slicing.
So we could say eight is equal to zero and then B is equal to l starting at 1 up to the end of the list.
And so we end up with a will be one and B will be 2 3 4 5 6.
Or we can just use simple unpacking and combine these two lines of code into a single line using this.
We're just doing unpacking right.
We're unpacking L 0 into a.
And we're unpacking L-1 colon into B.
This by the way is also sometimes called parallel assignment but it's just unpacking.
So we can certainly write it this way but we could also reuse the star operator in the following way.
We can say a comma Stobie B equals L and it does exactly the same thing.
It's basically saying when you look at l at this list here or whatever iterable it is take the first
element of that iterable stuff it into a and then everything else make it into a list and put it into
the so it's clean the syntax.
First of all it's a little simpler writing this than writing that.
But the other main difference is that it applies to any iterable not just sequence types write sequence
types we need sequence types in order to be able to slice right.
We need an indexable type in order to be able to slice.
We need the concept of an index or you know element zero element one element to but not all intervals
have that property.
For example sets and dictionaries.
You can't slice them right.
There is and there is no ordering and sets and dictionaries.
So this Hiho will walk of any iterable type.
So let's take a look at the usage with all the types forced.
So let's say we write this eight commas Tambi equals this list.
Now we've already seen what it does and we know that we end up with minus 10 in a and then B is a list
that contains the remaining elements.
Now of course we can also unpack a tuple.
It doesn't have to be a list.
If we take a tuple or a topple then the same thing's going to happen.
Negative 10 is going to go into 8 and then 5 2 and 100 are going to go into B and here's where we get.
So you'll notice that B is still a list.
So we always unpack into a list.
Right.
Even though we started off of a table that doesn't matter.
B The B that gets created by unpacking will get unpacked into a list type.
Now we can look at a string.
A string is an iterable as well.
And so when we write this well we end up with a being the first character and B will b y and z.
But of course it's also a list right.
It's going to get unpacked into a list so the following also want you don't have to just have to you
know one element.
You can have two so you can say unpack the first element then the second element and then the rest right.
So you can just read this stuff.
See as the rest.
So we're going to unpack this which is a tuple as well into this tuple here.
So we'll get equal to one because two and then C will be the rest as a list.
So 3 4 5 is a list.
We can also add elements after the Stasi.
So in this case we're saying make a the first element B.
So that should be the second element then D should be the last element which is 5 and then C will be
the rest which is 3 and 4.
And so we end up with that style of unpacking.
Of course it works with strings as well and strings are iterable.
So again we're going to get A's p.
We'll get that B is y t h and then C is Oh and D is an write C and D are the last two elements of the
string is the first and then be there for the rest which is these three characters again as in.
Now that should be pretty obvious.
But since that star operator means the rest it can only be used once in the left hand side of an unpacking
assignment.
So you can't write a comic.
Tom becomes Stassi.
I mean what does that mean.
Right.
B is supposed to take everything else is supposed to take the rest.
But Stassi is also saying take the rests so obviously that's not going to work.
All right.
So we've seen how we can use the star operator on the left hand side of an assignment to unpack the
right hand side as a reminder.
Right.
We saw that syntax but we can also use it this way we can use it in the right hand side of an assignment.
So let's take a look at that.
Let's take two lists L1 L2 and we can write this.
We can create a new list by using these square brackets and then we're going to unpack L-1 and unpack
L2.
So unpacking L-1 means what it means that we're essentially going to create all these individual elements
1 2 and 3 and incenting L2.
We're going to unpack 4 5 and 6 into individual elements and we essentially will end up with the combined
list.
Right.
So essentially we're able to merge two lists in this way by using the Star operators.
Of course it works with strings as well.
Right.
It works with any iterable.
So if we do this then we'll end up you know and we do against Thara wants to we'll end up with 1 2 3
x y and z.
Right.
So this is how you can use the star operator on the right hand side of an expression Now let's take
a look at the usage of order types.
So types such as sets and dictionaries have no ordering.
So for example let's say you create a set this way and we print s we just simply do this type this in
pure python console and then print s and see what you get.
I got this.
Your mileage may vary.
You may get something else.
Most likely you'll get the same but you could depending on the version of Python you are using or the
implementation you could get something very different.
But at least notice that the older was not preserved right.
So there is no ordering inserts.
There's no guarantee order of any kind.
It doesn't matter how you created the set or whether you know or how you appended values to the set
if you did that.
It's not going to maintain any of that order.
So be careful put the star operettas tool works right.
We said it works for any interval so you can certainly do something like this.
Right.
We can take a stand because of sequels.
But the problem is what's the first element.
What's the last element that really doesn't have much meaning.
So you'll get something right.
In this case we get a 10.
B is 3 in D and C is negative 99 which by the way corresponds to how we interacted through the set.
So you know the results that you get when you're iterating the set using let's say a for loop or printing
it out while printing and maybe not but you'll get the same thing there.
But the bottom line is you can't count on any kind of order.
So using unpacking this way is rarely used because it doesn't you know there's not a whole lot you can
do with it.
However it is useful when used on the right hand side of an expression.
So for example let's say we have this dictionary here and I'll use dictionaries now and we have another
dictionary D2 and we have a third dictionary D-3.
So you'll notice that H is in both D2 and D-3.
Now if we iterate a dictionary what do we get or we get the keys right.
So entering a dictionary is actually iterating the keys of the dictionary so we can actually unpack
the dictionaries inside a list and what's going to happen is that it's essentially going to unpack the
keys into this list.
And so we'll end up with this list here.
And you'll notice by the way that H is repeated twice.
Now maybe you want to get a list of all the keys that are in those three dictionaries but without any
repetition.
Right if you keep the repetition that might be useful to count the number of times a key is used for
example because then you could go ahead and write some code to count each individual key value in here.
How many times it occurs.
But if you just want to know what the individual keys are then instead of unpacking into a list well
you could unpack into a set.
Right.
And so we'd end up with a set.
And of course sets don't have repetitions so it would only show up once again the order is not guaranteed.
I'm just riding it out this way.
So it's easy to read but you know it's not going to come back in that order necessarily.
OK.
So when we worked with dictionaries we saw that star essentially iterated the keys.
Right.
So this is a reminder if we did that we just got the keys of the dictionary not the values we lost the
values an order is not guaranteed.
I keep repeating that and harping on that because it's important.
So we might ask the question can we unpack the key value pairs of the dictionary.
Can we retain the values as well as the Keys.
And of course the answer is yes and for that we have to use this double star operator.
So let's take a look at how that works.
Let's do again those same three dictionaries that we had again note that H is in both D2 D3 and they
have different values.
H has a value of four in the two and a value of five in D-3.
So now we can unpack and we're going to unpack these dictionaries into another dictionary.
Now you have to note that the star store operator cannot be used in the left hand side of an assignment.
That's a restriction on that operator.
You can only use it on the right hand side.
So you can't use it to unpack things into.
Right.
But you can unpack the dictionary itself.
So here we're going to stuff it inside a dictionary.
And as you might expect but we get back is basically that those three dictionaries have been merged
together.
So this is a quick and easy way to merge dictionaries.
There's a little added caveat though if you look at the value of age it's five.
Well remember we had eight show up twice so we can only have one value the keys and dictionaries have
to be unique.
But because D-3 was merged last that means that the value for age of 5 basically overwrote the value
of h that at this point you don't merge the two had a value of four that got overwritten essentially
by five.
So that's actually pretty handy.
You can use that in different scenarios where maybe you have configuration settings where you might
have a config setting that's like your default.
And then you have you know maybe user specific settings and it might use the same keys because the users
overriding.
You can merge the two dictionaries this way by merging your defaults.
And then your user can Figgs and they will essentially override any existing keys from the default with
the user's settings and it will then fill in the gaps when things are missing from either dictionary
because you just get a merge essentially.
Again the order is not guaranteed.
So you could also use it to add key value pairs from one or more dictionaries into a dictionary literal.
So what do I mean by dictionary literal.
Well just this right D1 here was defined using a dictionary literal and we just typed in the key value.
Now of course you can do this.
You can start writing a dictionary using literal key value pairs and then you can decide to merge in
another dictionary.
So that works perfectly fine.
And if you do that we end up with A's one.
Why is a one ace was ten.
Well we merged in D-1 after we had defined h to be 10.
So it's going to get replaced with one and then B is two and sees three.
Of course if you want.
You can also start by unpacking your dictionary first and then tagging on.
You know whatever you want as our key value Luttrell's in which case you will get A's 10 because even
though ace started its life off as one in D-1 we redefined it to be ten later on.
And so that takes effect again.
The orders that guarantee you I'm going to keep harping on that.
All right.
The next thing to look at is nested unpacking.
So Python will support nested unpacking as well.
What do I mean by that.
Well let's look at this list.
This list has a nested list inside the third element of this list is itself a list is itself an adorable.
So we can unpack it this way.
Right.
We're going to say come a be Kamisese equal to else.
So what's going to happen is that we're going to take the first element of L and put it into a well
first element and what we're going to take the second element stuff it into B.
And the third element is what.
Well it's the list three come before.
And we're going to assign that to see.
So C will actually be a list.
Now once we have that we can also Furthermore unpack C into two variables by just writing the comic
equal C.
Right so now we've unpacked this whole list into its individual elements even the nested ones into individual
variables.
But we have two steps here right.
We have to first unpack the last element and then unpack that element itself.
Well you can just write that.
So we get D.S. really is for.
But you can just write that in this way you can just say a comma a B comma and this element here is
a tuple and that's equal to that.
So it's going to do the one into the a.
The two into the B and then to unpack 3:04 into CD.
So it's going to unpack 3 into C and 4 into D.
So that's pretty neat.
And it works with any levels of nesting.
Now since strings are intervals too you can also write something like this.
This will work just as well.
And what are we doing here.
Well we're assigning the first element to eight 8 to one goes into a c d and e he is going to be assigned
X Y Z.
Right that's the last element.
And this is the last element.
So B will be the rest which is two and three and then C D either top or C D E will be x y z.
But what does that mean.
Well it's going to unpack X into see why into D and Z into it.
So we end up with is 1 B as 2 3 and then C is X D is y z so again that's just nested unpacking Okay.
So lastly I want to come back to a state that we made earlier that we can only use the operate the star
operator once in the left hand side of an unpacking assignment.
So how about something like this then.
Right.
A common Stobie.
See commerce daddy and the top Well looks like we have two different star operators on the left hand
side well that's OK because even though it looks like we're using the stuff twice this star is nested
inside another expression.
So it actually doesn't belong to the initial top or it belongs to a nested table.
So that works just fine.
Let's see how well one will go into a C and study is the last element right.
That's a that's essentially a variable.
You could have said X.
Right.
So X would be Python.
So the rest is two and three.
So B will be two in three.
And this top will here.
X will be equal to Python.
So now Python is going to get unpacked into C and D.
So you can see the Saudi has nothing to do with what's going on as we're unpacking the outer topple
and so see what BP and D will be the rest.
So we talked about slicing earlier and how you could you know do a lot of this using slicing and we
saw that it didn't look that much simpler by using the Star operator compared to slicing.
Yeah the star operator applies to iterable and the slicing you know is more restricted in this case
though you can slice.
We're dealing with lists and strings.
You know you can index them so you can slice them.
So I challenge you to try writing this.
What we have right here.
But using slicing instead of using this unpacking and this nested unpacking try using slicing and don't
you know how code your value is so right in such a way that it will work for any number of elements
where the last one is a string or is any iterable for that matter and write it in such a way also that
you're not restricting yourself to a hardcoded length of that string or whatever.
Iterable that is that's going to be in there.
So try that before move on to the code in the next video.
Well we'll actually look at the solution for that.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in a bit.